[db/oracledb] Add application context piggyback for oracle database (#3901)
open-telemetry/semantic-conventions: docs/db/oracledb.md

**Status**: [Development][DocumentStatus]

### Application context piggyback

Instrumentations MAY propagate context by using an Oracle driver mechanism that piggybacks application context to the server in the same round trip as the SQL statement. Context injection SHOULD NOT be enabled by default, but instrumentations MAY allow users to opt into it.

When using W3C Trace Context, instrumentations SHOULD inject [`traceparent`](https://www.w3.org/TR/trace-context/#traceparent-header). If [`tracestate`](https://www.w3.org/TR/trace-context/#tracestate-header) is present, instrumentations MAY inject it together with `traceparent` as part of the propagated trace context value.

> If supported by the driver and server-side conventions, instrumentations MAY also propagate [`baggage`](https://www.w3.org/TR/baggage/) separately from trace context.

Reviewer: > If supported by the driver and server-side conventions

Is there a list as of which server and driver versions support is provided?

Author: Thanks.     I have updated the documentation to explicitly capture the required JDBC, .NET, and Oracle Database versions:

```
Client: Oracle JDBC Driver 23.26.2+ or ODP.NET (managed/core) 23.26.2+

Server: Oracle Database 26ai (23.26.2+)

```
I also added a note clarifying current server-side parsing limitations: the database engine natively parses and evaluates the W3C `traceparent` field, but it does not yet support tracestate or baggage data .

`Note: While this specification defines the wire format for both tracestate and baggage to ensure cross-language instrumentation consistency and forward compatibility, current versions of the Oracle Database server may only parse and evaluate the traceparent field. The tracestate and baggage data are safely passed along to the server via the driver but are intended for evaluation in a future database server release.`

tracestate: congo=t61rcWkgMzE\r\n
```

Example payload when `tracestate` is absent:

```text
traceparent: 00-0af7651916cd43dd8448eb211c80319c-b7ad6b7169203331-01\r\n
```

> **Note:** While this specification defines the wire format for both `tracestate` and `baggage` to ensure cross-language instrumentation consistency and forward compatibility, current versions of the Oracle Database server may only parse and evaluate the `traceparent` field. The `tracestate` and `baggage` data are safely passed along to the server via the driver but are intended for evaluation in a future database server release.

Although application context piggyback is not constrained by the 64 byte limit of `V$SESSION.ACTION`, it can still be subject to application context size limits. Oracle application context values are limited to 4000 bytes, and drivers such as `node-oracledb` may enforce the same limit in their APIs. Furthermore, this mechanism requires support from both the database client driver and the database server version in use. To successfully capture and process these values for end-to-end tracing, the database server must also be explicitly configured to enable tracing.

> Compared with `V$SESSION.ACTION`, application context piggyback avoids overloading a field that applications may already use and is not constrained by the 64 byte limit of `ACTION`.

Reviewer 2: I'd be in favor of deprecating V$SESSION section give there is a blessed-by-provider way to propagate context now.

@sincejune @XSAM @open-telemetry/semconv-db-approvers wdyt? 

@sudarshan12s are there cases when V$SESSION.ACTION is preferred / necessary? Can we provide an explicit recommendation to use new way over that?

Author: Hi @lmolkova, I've updated the document to address this. The `V$SESSION.ACTION` approach is now explicitly designated for older Oracle versions only.

I have added the exact minimum client and server versions required for the new `Application Context Piggyback `mechanism, along with a new `Recommendation Guidance` section details.

Please see.

Reviewer 3: @sudarshan12s Is it possible to read `traceparent` from `V$SESSION` after using piggybacks?

The [oracledbreceiver](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/blob/e3399f435a64b0a5aea33cc8d98edfef5bf07449/receiver/oracledbreceiver/templates/oracleQuerySampleSql.tmpl#L48) currently uses `V$SESSION` to sample running queries. The samples include information such as the query plan and blocking sessions. If not, then using only piggybacks would break the query sample feature of oracledbreceiver.

Or, is there a way to make spans from oracledb publish this type of information?

Reviewer: @XSAM are you asking for a migration path for the query sampling use case?

Reviewer 3: @kamphaus yeah, and it is more like a compatibility question. While I am glad to see a native header-alike protocol to support context propagation, i want to make sure this new protocol can support existing use cases so we can have a smooth migration in the future.

Ideally, if possible, could we read `piggyback` like a key-value map from `V$SESSION` (or at least expose `traceparent`). It keeps the query sampling use case working after switching to `piggyback`. This also correlates query samples with spans created by oracledb.

I am not sure native spans here can fully replace query samples in the future since query samples have  Oracle session, plan, wait, and blocking information. It might be too heavy for a span.

Author: Thanks @XSAM for pointing it out.  I've updated the PR to retain both approaches and explicitly define their distinct use cases in a new `"Co-existence & Recommendation Guidance"` section and comparison table.

Yes `Application Context Piggyback` current scope is just to handle native, end-to-end trace propagation.

Could you take another look and share your feedback.

Reviewer 3: @sudarshan12s Thanks for the update. It looks good, i only have a nit comment.

BTW, does oracledb team has any plan to expose `piggyback` in `V$SESSION`? Using two methods at the same time seem a little bit unideal. `V$SESSION.ACTION` also needs additional network round-trip, which i think it would be ideal to avoid.

Author: Thanks for the suggestion.

I've raised a request internally to evaulate exposing the `Application Context` trace context (for example, traceparent, tracestate, and related context values) through `V$SESSION`, which would allow external collectors such as `oracledbreceiver` to correlate traces without requiring a separate `V$SESSION.ACTION` update. I'll share an update here as I receive more information.

Regarding `V$SESSION.ACTION`, I've updated the specification to recommend using the driver-provided APIs (for example, `connection.action` in node-oracledb) instead of issuing `DBMS_APPLICATION_INFO.SET_ACTION()` directly. This reflects how instrumentations are expected to integrate with Oracle drivers and avoids requiring an explicit PL/SQL call for updating `ACTION`. The availability of driver APIs was mentioned in this [PR](https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions/pull/2610) but it wasn't explicitly captured in the specification, so I've added it here for clarity.

Reviewer 3: > I've raised a request internally to evaulate exposing the Application Context trace context (for example, traceparent, tracestate, and related context values) through V$SESSION

@sudarshan12s Thank you! Hope we can get the evaluation result soon. 👍

Reviewer: @sudarshan12s will you have the results soon enough to include in this PR or will you create a follow up issue / pull request for it?

Author: Update from internal discussions: Propagating `traceparent` into `V$SESSION `(similar to `ECID`) was already in the list of features and tracked under an internal bug..  Also `ECID` is better candidate than `ACTION` but it looks like the instrumentation modules already used `ACTION`.

Should I raise a public GitHub issue to track this externally ?

Author: I raised [issue](https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions/issues/3975) for tracking it.

```csharp
using OpenTelemetry;
using OpenTelemetry.Resources;
using OpenTelemetry.Trace;
using Oracle.ManagedDataAccess.Client;

// 1. Setup the OpenTelemetry Tracer Provider targeting the Oracle driver source
var tracerProvider = Sdk.CreateTracerProviderBuilder()
    .AddSource("Oracle.ManagedDataAccess.Core")
    .AddOtlpExporter() //Exporters must be OpenTelemetry Protocol (OTLP) compliant for Oracle Database OpenTelemetry
    .Build();

string connectString = "<your_connection_string>";

using (OracleConnection connection = new OracleConnection(connectString))
{
    using (OracleCommand command = connection.CreateCommand())
    {
        connection.Open();

        // 2. Opt-in to client context piggybacking.
        // The driver automatically serializes the active W3C trace context
        // into CLIENTCONTEXT (ora$opentelem$tracectx) during subsequent executions.

>         connection.DatabaseOpenTelemetryTracing = true;

Reviewer 2: ❤️

**Status**: [Development][DocumentStatus]

### Application context piggyback

Instrumentations MAY propagate context by using an Oracle driver mechanism that piggybacks application context to the server in the same round trip as the SQL statement. Context injection SHOULD NOT be enabled by default, but instrumentation MAY allow users to opt into it.

When using W3C Trace Context, instrumentations SHOULD inject [`traceparent`](https://www.w3.org/TR/trace-context/#traceparent-header). If [`tracestate`](https://www.w3.org/TR/trace-context/#tracestate-header) is present, instrumentations MAY inject it together with `traceparent` as part of the propagated trace context value.

If supported by the driver and server-side conventions, instrumentations MAY also propagate [`baggage`](https://www.w3.org/TR/baggage/) separately from trace context.

Instrumentations that propagate context MUST use the Oracle driver API on the same connection object that is used to execute the SQL statement. Instrumentations SHOULD use driver APIs that associate the context with the statement execution without requiring an additional database call.

> When the Oracle driver exposes an application context API, instrumentations SHOULD use that API to associate the trace context in the `CLIENTCONTEXT` namespace using the key `ora$opentelem$tracectx`. When supported, instrumentations MAY use the same API to send baggage in the same namespace using a separate key such as `ora$opentelem$baggage`. For example, in Java (`oracle.jdbc`), this is supported via [JDBC Connection Tracing APIs](https://docs.oracle.com/en/database/oracle/oracle-database/26/jajdb/oracle/jdbc/OracleConnection.html#Tracing) by enabling server-side telemetry and setting `clientcontext.ora$opentelem$tracectx` using `setClientInfo`. The value of `ora$opentelem$tracectx` MUST be formatted as one or more newline-delimited fields matching the format `field-name ": " field-value CRLF`. If `tracestate` is absent, its field line MUST be entirely omitted, and the string MUST consist solely of the `traceparent` line terminated by a single `CRLF`.

Author: I used the `/26/ `version specifically because native OpenTelemetry parsing support on server and these JDBC Connection Tracing hooks were finalised alongside the 26ai lifecycle updates.

Example payload with both fields present (note the trailing `\r\n` on each line):

```text
traceparent: 00-0af7651916cd43dd8448eb211c80319c-b7ad6b7169203331-01\r\n
tracestate: congo=t61rcWkgMzE\r\n
```

Example payload when `tracestate` is absent:

```text
traceparent: 00-0af7651916cd43dd8448eb211c80319c-b7ad6b7169203331-01\r\n

> ```

Author: These delimiters are part of string values for traceparent and tracestate keys as mentioned here https://docs.oracle.com/en/database/oracle/oracle-database/26/jajdb/oracle/jdbc/OracleConnection.html#Tracing

Compared with `V$SESSION.ACTION`, application context piggyback avoids overloading a field that applications may already use and is not constrained by the 64 byte limit of `ACTION`.

Example:

Note that Oracle database drivers in different languages expose different APIs for enabling application context propagation. In .NET, using the `Oracle.ManagedDataAccess.Core` driver, the instrumentation hooks into the built-in provider source, and users enable server-side propagation via the `DatabaseOpenTelemetryTracing` property on the connection:

```csharp
using OpenTelemetry;
using OpenTelemetry.Resources;
using OpenTelemetry.Trace;
using Oracle.ManagedDataAccess.Client;

// 1. Setup the OpenTelemetry Tracer Provider targeting the Oracle driver source
using var tracerProvider = Sdk.CreateTracerProviderBuilder()
    .AddSource("Oracle.ManagedDataAccess.Core")
    .SetResourceBuilder(
        ResourceBuilder.CreateDefault()
            .AddService("OrderProcessingService", serviceVersion: "1.0.0"))
    .AddOtlpExporter()
    .Build();

> string connectString = <your_connection_string>;

Author: used quotes.

using (OracleConnection connection = new OracleConnection(connectString))
{
    using (OracleCommand command = connection.CreateCommand())
    {
        connection.Open();

        // 2. Opt-in to client context piggybacking. 
        // The driver automatically serializes the active W3C trace context 
        // into CLIENTCONTEXT (ora$opentelem$tracectx) during subsequent executions.

>         connection.DatabaseOpenTelemetryTracing = true; 

Author: Fixed the extra spaces

});

try {
  connection.action = traceparent;
  await connection.execute("SELECT * FROM songs");
} finally {
  await connection.close();
}
```

### Choice of Propagation Mechanism

When selecting a context propagation strategy for Oracle Database, telemetry implementations SHOULD use `Application Context` for native distributed tracing, and MAY combine it with `V$SESSION.ACTION` for out-of-band query sampling.

| Mechanism | Implementation Type | Minimum Stack Requirements | Behavior |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| **Application Context** | **Native Distributed Tracing** | • **Client:** Oracle JDBC Driver 23.26.2+ or ODP.NET (managed or core) 23.26.2+<br><br>• **Server:** Oracle AI Database 26ai (server version 23.26.2 or later) | Injects W3C trace context into the CLIENTCONTEXT namespace. Context piggybacks on existing database round-trips without additional network calls. |
| **V$SESSION.ACTION** | **Out-of-Band Query Sampling** | Works on all Oracle Database versions | Exposes `traceparent` in `V$SESSION` for external polling components (e.g., `oracledbreceiver`) to correlate server-side execution plans, wait events, and lock graphs to client spans. |

> #### Co-existence & Recommendation Guidance

Reviewer 2: Thanks for writing this down!  I think we duplicate this guidance in sections above, would it be possible to just link to this anchor instead?

Author: I removed guidance from both sections `Application Context `and `V$SESSION.ACTION` and pointed to this link.

> - **Native Distributed Tracing:** `Application Context` is the preferred method for building application-to-database trace waterfalls when driver and database support are present.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Native Distributed Tracing:** `Application Context` is the preferred method of correlation when driver and database support are present.
```

Author: Done

> - **Out-of-Band Diagnostic Sampling:** `V$SESSION.ACTION` remains essential because it exposes the active `traceparent` to external collectors (such as [`oracledbreceiver`](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/blob/main/receiver/oracledbreceiver)), enabling them to correlate query samples, execution plans, wait events, and lock information collected from Oracle dynamic performance views with the originating client span.

Reviewer 2: collector does not have access to the native application context?

Author: The application context  (`SYS_CONTEXT` memory in the `CLIENTCONTEXT` namespace) is private to the active session. The collector connects as a seperate session and can not accesss this `CLIENTCONTEXT` of other session. 

I have raised an internal request to populate the `CLIENTCONTEXT` into v$session for this usecase.

The values stored in `CLIENTCONTEXT` are session state and can persist across statement executions unless the underlying driver automatically scopes or clears their lifetime.

When the underlying driver automatically manages the lifetime of `CLIENTCONTEXT`, instrumentations do not need to perform additional cleanup. Otherwise, instrumentations SHOULD manage the lifecycle of `ora$opentelem$tracectx` to prevent stale trace context from propagating across statement executions or pooled connections—including [Database Resident Connection Pooling (DRCP)](https://docs.oracle.com/en/database/oracle/oracle-database/26/adfns/performance-and-scalability.html#GUID-015CA8C1-2386-4626-855D-CC546DDC1086).

- **Post-Execution Cleanup:** Instrumentations SHOULD clear or reset the `ora$opentelem$tracectx` entry immediately following statement execution (for example, in a `finally` block).

If explicit post-execution teardown is not supported by the underlying driver API, instrumentations SHOULD clear or overwrite `ora$opentelem$tracectx` prior to executing any subsequent statement where active context propagation is disabled or absent.

> For guidance on selecting between mechanisms, legacy fallbacks, or running both concurrently, see **Choice of Propagation Mechanism**.

Reviewer 4: These two cross-references landed as bold text rather than links, so they aren't clickable -- following up on https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions/pull/3901#discussion_r3707848821, where the ask was to link to the anchor. The heading already has one in the table of contents.

```suggestion
For guidance on selecting between mechanisms, legacy fallbacks, or running both concurrently, see [Choice of Propagation Mechanism](#choice-of-propagation-mechanism).
```

Same on the `See **Choice of Propagation Mechanism**` sentence in the `V$SESSION.ACTION` section below.

Author: Fixed

**Status**: [Development][DocumentStatus]

### Application context piggyback

Instrumentations MAY propagate context by using an Oracle driver mechanism that piggybacks application context to the server in the same round trip as the SQL statement. Context injection SHOULD NOT be enabled by default, but instrumentations MAY allow users to opt into it.

When using W3C Trace Context, instrumentations SHOULD inject [`traceparent`](https://www.w3.org/TR/trace-context/#traceparent-header). If [`tracestate`](https://www.w3.org/TR/trace-context/#tracestate-header) is present, instrumentations MAY inject it together with `traceparent` as part of the propagated trace context value.

If supported by the driver and server-side conventions, instrumentations MAY also propagate [`baggage`](https://www.w3.org/TR/baggage/) separately from trace context.

Instrumentations that propagate context MUST use the Oracle driver API on the same connection object that is used to execute the SQL statement. Instrumentations SHOULD use driver APIs that associate the context with the statement execution without requiring an additional database call.

> When the Oracle driver exposes an application context API, instrumentations SHOULD use that API to associate the trace context in the `CLIENTCONTEXT` namespace using the key `ora$opentelem$tracectx`. When supported, instrumentations MAY use the same API to send baggage in the same namespace using a separate key such as `ora$opentelem$baggage`. For example, in Java (`oracle.jdbc`), this is supported via [JDBC Connection Tracing APIs](https://docs.oracle.com/en/database/oracle/oracle-database/26/jajdb/oracle/jdbc/OracleConnection.html#Tracing) by enabling server-side telemetry and setting `clientcontext.ora$opentelem$tracectx` using `setClientInfo`. The value of `ora$opentelem$tracectx` MUST be formatted as one or more fields, each terminated by CRLF (`\r\n`), with the syntax `field-name ":" SP field-value CRLF`. If `tracestate` is absent, its field line MUST be entirely omitted, and the string MUST consist solely of the `traceparent` line terminated by a single `CRLF`.

Reviewer: Is the key `ora$opentelem$tracectx` documented anywhere in the Oracle documentation?

Author: No, it isn't listed in the official documentation. However, it is actively utilized within Oracle's .NET and [JDBC](https://github.com/oracle/ojdbc-extensions/blob/eeacf4a26211772c63f23e7fd88bb5b1923fad6b/ojdbc-provider-observability/src/main/java/oracle/jdbc/provider/observability/tracers/otel/OTelTracer.java#L85) driver implementations.

var tracerProvider = Sdk.CreateTracerProviderBuilder()
    .AddSource("Oracle.ManagedDataAccess.Core")
    .AddOtlpExporter() //Exporters must be OpenTelemetry Protocol (OTLP) compliant for Oracle Database OpenTelemetry
    .Build();

string connectString = "<your_connection_string>";

using (OracleConnection connection = new OracleConnection(connectString))
{
    using (OracleCommand command = connection.CreateCommand())
    {
        connection.Open();

        // 2. Opt-in to client context piggybacking.
        // The driver automatically serializes the active W3C trace context
        // into CLIENTCONTEXT (ora$opentelem$tracectx) during subsequent executions.
        connection.DatabaseOpenTelemetryTracing = true;

        // 3. Execute queries. Trace context piggybacks silently on these roundtrips.
        command.CommandText = "INSERT INTO MYTABLE VALUES ('val1', 100)";
        command.ExecuteNonQuery();

        command.CommandText = "SELECT COL2 FROM MYTABLE WHERE COL2 = 100";
        using (OracleDataReader reader = command.ExecuteReader())
        {
            // Consume the results
        }

        connection.Close();
    }
}
```

> For detailed configuration of native in-database observability capabilities, trace management, and OTLP collector endpoint setups, refer to the official [Oracle Database OpenTelemetry Observability Architecture](https://docs.oracle.com/en/database/oracle/oracle-database/26/tgsql/observabilitly-open-telemetry.html) and the administrative [DBMS_OBSERVABILITY Package Reference](https://docs.oracle.com/en/database/oracle/oracle-database/26/arpls/dbms_observability.html).

Author: URL has typo   `observabilitly` , but its working URL

Although application context piggyback is not constrained by the 64 byte limit of `V$SESSION.ACTION`, it can still be subject to application context size limits. Oracle application context values are limited to 4000 bytes. Furthermore, this mechanism requires support from both the database client driver and the database server version in use. To successfully capture and process these values for end-to-end tracing, the database server must also be explicitly configured to enable tracing.

Compared with `V$SESSION.ACTION`, application context piggyback avoids overloading a field that applications may already use and is not constrained by the 64 byte limit of `ACTION`.

Both `Application Context Piggyback` and `V$SESSION.ACTION` MAY be enabled concurrently in the same application. See **Choice of Propagation Mechanism** for recommendations on selecting and combining these mechanisms.

> Example:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Example of Piggyback:
```

For a moment, i thought it is the example of combination of `Application Context Piggyback` and `V$SESSION.ACTION`

Author: I fixed it by keeping this section above and the Example below it.  I hope now its clear.  Like this:

```
Note that Oracle database drivers in different languages expose different APIs for enabling Application Context. In .NET, using the [ODP.NET Core or managed ODP.NET driver](https://docs.oracle.com/en/database/oracle/oracle-database/26/odpnt/featOpenTelemetry.html#GUID-498BB919-43C4-494F-A73B-74980C40CFF3), the instrumentation hooks into the built-in provider source, and users enable server-side propagation via the DatabaseOpenTelemetryTracing property on the connection.

Example:
```

**Status**: [Development][DocumentStatus]

### Application Context

Instrumentations MAY propagate context by using an Oracle driver mechanism that piggybacks application context to the server in the same round trip as the SQL statement. Context injection SHOULD NOT be enabled by default, but instrumentations MAY allow users to opt into it.

When using W3C Trace Context, instrumentations SHOULD inject a valid [`traceparent`](https://www.w3.org/TR/trace-context/#traceparent-header). If a valid [`tracestate`](https://www.w3.org/TR/trace-context/#tracestate-header) is present, instrumentations MAY inject it together with `traceparent` as part of the propagated trace context value.

> If supported by the driver and server-side conventions, instrumentations MAY also propagate [`baggage`](https://www.w3.org/TR/baggage/) separately from trace context.

Reviewer 4: "If supported by the driver and server-side conventions" isn't actionable for an implementer, and this document is the place to fix that. It already pins `ora$opentelem$tracectx` and defines its exact value grammar, so baggage deserves the same treatment rather than "a separate key such as `ora$opentelem$baggage`" below. As written there is no normative key, no value encoding, and no way for an instrumentation to know whether to send it, so two implementations could both follow this text and fail to interoperate.

Could we either define the key and its value encoding here alongside the trace-context format, or drop the sentence until the server side is ready for it? If baggage stays, the compatibility table and the server-side parsing note below probably need a line about it too, since both currently cover trace context only.

Author: I have removed the reference to baggage for now until server starts supporting it.

> Instrumentations that propagate context MUST use the Oracle driver API on the same connection that executes the SQL statement. Instrumentations SHOULD use driver APIs that associate the context with statement execution without requiring an additional database call.

Reviewer 4: Two things about connection scoping here.

First, this says "the same connection" while the `V$SESSION.ACTION` section below says "the same **physical** connection". These are parallel requirements, so it would help to use one term consistently or say explicitly which is meant -- with driver pools and DRCP the logical/physical distinction changes what an implementer has to do.

Second, and more significant: both the `CLIENTCONTEXT` application context and `ACTION` are session state, and pooled connections retain session state after release. node-oracledb documents this explicitly: "Pooled connections will retain their session state after they have been released back to the pool with connection.close()". So a connection handed out by a later `getConnection()` can still carry the previous span's `traceparent`, and any statement executed on it without a fresh injection gets attributed to a stale parent. That seems worth a requirement -- for example, instrumentations SHOULD clear or overwrite the propagated value when the connection is released or reused (node-oracledb exposes `connection.clearAppContext()` for exactly this). The same concern applies to the `V$SESSION.ACTION` section.

Author: I used `same connection ` for both the sections.

On the sticky state of `CLIENTCONTEXT / ACTION` , I updated the ownership details . The instrumentation should clear the context explicitly, If the driver does not support clearing on disabling the context propogation.

When the Oracle driver exposes an application context API, instrumentations SHOULD use that API to associate the trace context in the `CLIENTCONTEXT` namespace using the key `ora$opentelem$tracectx`. When supported, instrumentations MAY use the same API to send baggage in the same namespace using a separate key such as `ora$opentelem$baggage`. For example, in Java (`oracle.jdbc`), this is supported via [JDBC Connection Tracing APIs](https://docs.oracle.com/en/database/oracle/oracle-database/26/jajdb/oracle/jdbc/OracleConnection.html#Tracing) by enabling server-side telemetry and setting `clientcontext.ora$opentelem$tracectx` using `setClientInfo`.

The value of `ora$opentelem$tracectx` MUST use this exact field order and syntax:

```text
traceparent: SP traceparent-value CRLF
[tracestate: SP tracestate-value CRLF]
```

> `SP` is one ASCII space byte (`0x20`). `CRLF` is the two-byte sequence carriage return (`0x0D`) followed by line feed (`0x0A`), represented as `\r\n`. `traceparent-value` and `tracestate-value` are values valid under their respective W3C Trace Context definitions. The bracketed `tracestate` line is optional as a whole. Instrumentations MUST NOT include any other fields in this value, MUST NOT emit an empty `tracestate` line, and MUST NOT add extra whitespace or line terminators.

Reviewer 4: The "MUST NOT emit an empty `tracestate` line" requirement looks like it conflicts with Oracle's own reference implementation. The sample in the `OracleConnection` documentation linked above unconditionally appends `String.format("tracestate: %s\r\n", stringBuilder)` and returns `traceParent + traceState`, so a span with an empty trace state produces `tracestate: \r\n`. Do we know which form the server actually accepts? If Oracle's sample matches the server, this `MUST NOT` would push conforming instrumentations away from the reference implementation.

Separately, that same sample builds the trace state with `stringBuilder.append(k).append("=").append(v)` per entry and no comma separator, so with two or more entries it produces something that is not a valid W3C `tracestate`. "values valid under their respective W3C Trace Context definitions" leaves that ambiguous -- could we spell out that `tracestate-value` is the comma-delimited list of `key=value` members defined by W3C Trace Context?

Author: Thanks for pointing this. I have asked to make necessary corrections (trailing `\r\n `and the required `comma` seperators) to the example in the [link](https://docs.oracle.com/en/database/oracle/oracle-database/26/jajdb/oracle/jdbc/OracleConnection.html#Tracing) 

The server does not parse for `tracestate` today. But it will be added in future releases.

The spec is updated as follows to avoid empty tracestate and comma-delimited values should be used:
`
`SP` is one ASCII space byte (`0x20`). `CRLF` is the two-byte sequence carriage return (`0x0D`) followed by line feed (`0x0A`), represented as `\r\n`. `traceparent-value` is a value valid under the W3C Trace Context `traceparent` definition. `tracestate-value` is a comma-delimited list of `key=value` list-members valid under the W3C Trace Context `tracestate` definition. The bracketed `tracestate` line is optional as a whole.
 When `tracestate` is absent or empty, instrumentations MUST NOT emit the `tracestate` line. Instrumentations MUST NOT include any other fields in this value or add whitespace other than the required `SP` or extra line terminators.`

Example payload with both fields present (note the trailing `\r\n` on each line):

```text
traceparent: 00-0af7651916cd43dd8448eb211c80319c-b7ad6b7169203331-01\r\n

> tracestate: congo=t61rcWkgMzE\r\n

Reviewer 4: Reinforcing the earlier thread on this, with the source: Oracle's `OracleConnection` documentation writes the whole value as a single quoted string -- `"traceparent: <version>-<traceID>-<spanID>-<traceFlags>\r\ntracestate: <traceState>\r\n"` -- which removes the ambiguity entirely. As rendered here, each line ends with a literal `\r\n` *and* a Markdown line break, so it can be read as two terminators per field. Matching Oracle's representation seems safest:

```suggestion
"traceparent: 00-0af7651916cd43dd8448eb211c80319c-b7ad6b7169203331-01\r\ntracestate: congo=t61rcWkgMzE\r\n"
```

The lead-in on line 241 would then read better as "Example payload with both fields present, shown as a quoted string so the line terminators are unambiguous:".

Author: Done.

```

Example payload when `tracestate` is absent:

```text

> traceparent: 00-0af7651916cd43dd8448eb211c80319c-b7ad6b7169203331-01\r\n

Reviewer 4: Same for the `tracestate`-absent example, and the lead-in above it.

```suggestion
"traceparent: 00-0af7651916cd43dd8448eb211c80319c-b7ad6b7169203331-01\r\n"
```

Author: Done.

```

> > **Note:** While this specification defines the wire format for `traceparent` and `tracestate` to ensure cross-language instrumentation consistency and forward compatibility, current versions of the Oracle Database server may only parse and evaluate the `traceparent` field. The `tracestate` data is safely passed along to the server via the driver but is intended for evaluation in a future database server release.

Reviewer 4: Does this document need to describe server-side behavior at all? The scope of this section is context propagation -- what the instrumentation puts on the wire -- and the value format defined above is the whole contract. What the Oracle engine currently does with `tracestate`, and when it might start doing more, seems like Oracle's to document and change independently of this specification.

Keeping it here has real costs. The roadmap commitment ("intended for evaluation in a future database server release") can't be verified or retracted by this repository and will linger as stale text, and the "current versions only parse `traceparent`" claim starts drifting the moment a server release changes it -- with no signal here that it has.

I'd suggest dropping this note. If something needs to stay so implementers know `tracestate` is worth sending at all, a single sentence pointing at Oracle's documentation for server-side handling would do that without pinning the behavior here.

Author: I have removed this `Note`.  traceState is currently not parsed from server.

> Although `Application Context` is not constrained by the 64-byte limit of `V$SESSION.ACTION`, it is subject to a 4000-byte application-context limit (see the [`SYS_CONTEXT`](https://docs.oracle.com/en/database/oracle/oracle-database/26/sqlrf/SYS_CONTEXT.html) documentation). Furthermore, this mechanism requires support from both the database client driver and the database server version in use. To successfully capture and process these values for end-to-end tracing, the database server must also be explicitly configured to enable tracing.

Reviewer 4: The 4000-byte limit is stated but no behavior is defined for exceeding it, and truncating at an arbitrary byte boundary would produce a value the server cannot parse. W3C Trace Context does allow dropping whole `tracestate` list-members, so there is a well-defined way to shrink the value.

Also, "the database server must also be explicitly configured" is a lowercase "must" that reads like a requirement; neutral wording avoids the BCP 14 ambiguity.

```suggestion
Although `Application Context` is not constrained by the 64-byte limit of `V$SESSION.ACTION`, it is subject to a 4000-byte application-context limit (see the [`SYS_CONTEXT`](https://docs.oracle.com/en/database/oracle/oracle-database/26/sqlrf/SYS_CONTEXT.html) documentation). This mechanism requires support from both the database client driver and the database server version in use. If the encoded value would exceed 4000 bytes, instrumentations MUST NOT truncate it at an arbitrary byte boundary; they MAY omit the `tracestate` line or remove whole `tracestate` list-members as permitted by W3C Trace Context. End-to-end tracing works only when the database server is also explicitly configured to enable tracing.
```

Author: Done.

> Compared with `V$SESSION.ACTION`, `Application Context` avoids overloading a field that applications may already use and is not constrained by the 64 byte limit of `ACTION`.

Reviewer 4: The 64-byte comparison is already made two paragraphs above, so this can keep just the part that is new.

```suggestion
Compared with `V$SESSION.ACTION`, `Application Context` avoids overloading a field that applications may already use.
```

Author: Done

Instrumentations that propagate context MUST update `V$SESSION.ACTION` on the same physical connection as the SQL statement.

> Applications may already use `ACTION` for their own session metadata, so instrumentations SHOULD ensure updates do not overwrite application metadata unless explicitly configured. Instrumentations MAY support updating `V$SESSION.ACTION` alongside `Application Context` to allow out-of-band telemetry collectors to sample session state using the active `traceparent`.

Reviewer 4: Injecting `traceparent` into `ACTION` *is* overwriting whatever the application put there, and drivers generally don't let you read it back -- node-oracledb documents `action` as a write-only property, so a generic instrumentation cannot inspect and restore the previous value. As written, "SHOULD ensure updates do not overwrite application metadata unless explicitly configured" doesn't tell an implementer what to actually do (skip when the application has set a value? require a dedicated opt-in? nothing?), and the "unless explicitly configured" caveat overlaps the opt-in rule at the top of this section.

Could this state the ownership policy directly instead -- that enabling injection means the instrumentation owns `ACTION` for that session, and that instrumentations SHOULD document the side effect?

Author: I have updated the spec to add the above detail.

Enabling `ACTION` propagation gives the instrumentation ownership of the `V$SESSION.ACTION` value for the duration of the propagation window. Because database driver interfaces are generally write-only, instrumentations cannot inspect or preserve a pre-existing application-set `ACTION` value. Instrumentations SHOULD document that enabling this feature overwrites any existing `ACTION` metadata for the duration of propagation and that the previous value is not restored automatically.

For example, in [node-oracledb](https://node-oracledb.readthedocs.io/en/latest/api_manual/connection.html#connection.action), instrumentation can set the `action` property on the connection before executing statements:

```javascript
import oracledb from "oracledb";

// The instrumentation sets the current W3C traceparent.
const traceparent =
    "00-0af7651916cd43dd8448eb211c80319c-b7ad6b7169203331-01";

const connection = await oracledb.getConnection({
  user: process.env.DB_USER,
  password: process.env.DB_PASSWORD,
  connectString: process.env.DB_CONNECT_STRING,
});

try {
  connection.action = traceparent;
  await connection.execute("SELECT * FROM songs");
} finally {
  await connection.close();
}
```

### Choice of Propagation Mechanism

When selecting a context propagation strategy for Oracle Database, telemetry implementations SHOULD use `Application Context` for native distributed tracing, and MAY combine it with `V$SESSION.ACTION` for out-of-band query sampling.

| Mechanism | Implementation Type | Minimum Stack Requirements | Behavior |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |

> | **Application Context** | **Native Distributed Tracing** | • **Client:** Oracle JDBC Driver 23.26.2+ or ODP.NET (managed or core) 23.26.2+<br><br>• **Server:** Oracle AI Database 26ai (server version 23.26.2 or later) | Engine-native parsing of W3C trace context via round-trip protocol. Creates server-side spans and propagates context without additional round-trips. |

Reviewer 4: Two things about this row.

The client list covers JDBC and ODP.NET only, but node-oracledb 7.0 added `connection.appContext(namespaceName, keyValues)` and `connection.clearAppContext()`, which is exactly the "application context API" this section describes -- and node-oracledb is already the example driver in the `V$SESSION.ACTION` section below. Should there be a node-oracledb entry here, or should the row say it enumerates only the drivers with documented server-side OpenTelemetry integration?

Also, the Behavior column describes engine internals ("Engine-native parsing of W3C trace context", "Creates server-side spans"), which runs into the same scope question I raised on the note above -- how much server behavior belongs in a propagation section. As written it also reads as though the server parses `tracestate`, which that note contradicts, so either way this column probably wants trimming to what actually affects the instrumentation.

Author: I have removed the server details and instead explained the piggyback flow from client. This looks ok? 
`
Injects W3C trace context into the CLIENTCONTEXT namespace. Context piggybacks on existing database round-trips without additional network calls.`

| **V$SESSION.ACTION** | **Out-of-Band Query Sampling** | Works on all Oracle Database versions | Exposes `traceparent` in `V$SESSION` for external polling components (e.g., `oracledbreceiver`) to correlate server-side execution plans, wait events, and lock graphs to client spans. |

#### Co-existence & Recommendation Guidance

- **Native Distributed Tracing:** `Application Context` is the preferred method for building application-to-database trace waterfalls when driver and database support are present.

> - **Out-of-Band Diagnostic Sampling:** `V$SESSION.ACTION` remains essential because it exposes the active `traceparent` to external collectors (such as `oracledbreceiver`), enabling them to correlate query samples, execution plans, wait events, and lock information collected from Oracle dynamic performance views with the originating client span.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Out-of-Band Diagnostic Sampling:** `V$SESSION.ACTION` remains essential because it exposes the active `traceparent` to external collectors (such as [`oracledbreceiver`](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/blob/main/receiver/oracledbreceiver)), enabling them to correlate query samples, execution plans, wait events, and lock information collected from Oracle dynamic performance views with the originating client span.
```

Author: Done

> - **Concurrent Usage:** Instrumentations MAY enable **both** mechanisms simultaneously. Enabling `Application Context` alongside `V$SESSION.ACTION` creates native distributed spans while enabling out-of-band query samplers to correlate rich database diagnostics, such as [`db.server.query_sample`](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/blob/main/receiver/oracledbreceiver/documentation.md#dbserverquery_sample), with the originating `traceparent`.

Reviewer 4: `db.server.query_sample` isn't a semantic convention -- it's an optional *event* emitted by `oracledbreceiver`, and that receiver's own generated documentation lists "Semantic Convention: -" for its attributes. A search of this repository returns no matches for it. Rendering it as a backticked name alongside real conventions implies it is one. The link also points at `main`, which can drift as that generated file changes.

```suggestion
- **Concurrent Usage:** Instrumentations MAY enable **both** mechanisms simultaneously. Enabling `Application Context` alongside `V$SESSION.ACTION` creates native distributed spans while allowing out-of-band query samplers to correlate the receiver-specific [`db.server.query_sample` event](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/blob/e3399f435a64b0a5aea33cc8d98edfef5bf07449/receiver/oracledbreceiver/documentation.md#dbserverquery_sample) and its database diagnostics with the originating `traceparent`.
```

Author: Done

SELECT * FROM songs;
```

### Choice of Propagation Mechanism

> When selecting a context propagation strategy for Oracle Database, telemetry implementations MUST prioritize the **Application Context Piggyback** mechanism over the legacy `V$SESSION.ACTION` method.

Author: I can address them after review of updated changes.

> When selecting a context propagation strategy for Oracle Database, telemetry implementations MUST prioritize the **Application Context Piggyback** mechanism over the legacy `V$SESSION.ACTION` method.

Author: I have removed the word `“deprecated” ` and documented for retaining it for existing usecases.

| Mechanism | Implementation Type | Minimum Stack Requirements | Tracing Behavior |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |

> | **Application Context Piggyback (Recommended)** | **Native** | • **Client:** Oracle JDBC Driver 23.26.2+ or ODP.NET (managed or core) 23.26.2+<br><br>• **Server:** Oracle AI Database 26ai 23.26.2+ | Built-in server-side parsing of W3C telemetry context via the network protocol. |

Author: `26ai`  is generally the release name and `23.26.2+ `is the specific version from where its supported.

> | **Application Context Piggyback (Recommended)** | **Native** | • **Client:** Oracle JDBC Driver 23.26.2+ or ODP.NET (managed or core) 23.26.2+<br><br>• **Server:** Oracle AI Database 26ai 23.26.2+ | Built-in server-side parsing of W3C telemetry context via the network protocol. |

Author: I used `Oracle AI Database 26ai (23.26.2+) `

> | **`V$SESSION.ACTION`** | **Passive Workaround** | Older Oracle versions | Diagnostic text label only. Requires external collectors or triggers to track changes. |

Author: I used single` | `only, can this be checked again.
